Propose enhancement for versioning profiles (#383)
ComplianceAsCode/compliance-operator: enhancements/profile-versioning.md

* `1.2.0-1` includes flexibility to denote differences across the same profile version
* `1.2.0-1+e076b1d7ac` include the content of the profile as a SHA

Initially, we may choose to only implement simple versions (e.g., 1.2.0, or
4.0.0). Depending on user feedback, we have the option to include support for
more complex version strings that use pre-release or build metadata within the
semantic version specification to denote changes between operator releases.

Note that if we do decide to support pre-release or build metadata as part of
the version string, we should ensure version string evaluation considers
`1.2.0` older than `1.2.0-1` or `1.2.0-2+e076b1d7ac`.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

What are the caveats to the implementation? What are some important details that
didn't come across above. Go in to as much detail as necessary here. This might
be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.

### Risks and Mitigations

What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate. Think broadly. For
example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger OKD
ecosystem.

> How will security be reviewed and by whom?

Reviewer: What do you mean by security here?

Author: This is really just boilerplate questions for the enhancement template.

Although - from a security perspective, users should ensure the profile version they're using is what they intend to run. For example at the time of this writing, running CIS OpenShift 1.6.0 wouldn't be possible, because that profile version doesn't exist.

How will UX be reviewed and by whom?

Consider including folks that also work outside your immediate sub-project.

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

1. Should the `version` attribute be immutable?

> 2. Should a profile have multiple versions (e.g., PCI-DSS version 3.2.1 and 4.0.0)?

Author: The easy answer I think would be to maintain multiple profiles, each with a different version. Otherwise, we would need to see if the data stream would support a profile with multiple versions, and then ensure the Profile CRDs advertise the various versions available during use. For example, it might be the difference between:

```console
$ oc get profiles.compliance 
NAME       VERSION
pci-dss    3.2.1
pci-dss    4.0.0
ocp4-cis   1.4.0
```

```console
$ oc get profiles.compliance 
NAME 
pci-dss 
ocp4-cis
$ oc get profiles.compliance pci-dss 
NAME       VERSIONS
pci-dss    3.2.1, 4.0.0
```

I'm not sure if the ComplianceAsCode/content build tooling would support the second case, but @yuumasato might know.

> 2. Should a profile have multiple versions (e.g., PCI-DSS version 3.2.1 and 4.0.0)?

Reviewer 2: I think we will have issues here because two CRD can't share same name?

> 2. Should a profile have multiple versions (e.g., PCI-DSS version 3.2.1 and 4.0.0)?

Reviewer 2: I think the idea of
```
oc get profiles.compliance pci-dss 
NAME       VERSIONS
pci-dss    3.2.1, 4.0.0
```
is good here, maybe we can have multiple version xml config map files in the future, and provide a default version for user, and have an option to choose a specific version

> 3. What happens when a `Profile` extended by a `TailoredProfile` changes?

Reviewer: This is a good question. I think the TailoredProfile should get updated as well, unless there is an annotation on the TailoredProfile to not be updated.
Why would we not update the TailoredProfile base version?
Also, what about versions for TailoredProfiles? How do you plan addressing this?

Author: So far, I don't have a plan for versioning TailoredProfiles. I also think it's reason that a TailoredProfile would automatically update to use the content in the Profile it is extending.

Perhaps in the future, and if users request it, we could consider a technique to pin a TailoredProfile to a particular profile version, but for now, that feels like an pre-optimization of the feature.

What do you think?

Author: If I understand this correctly, `TailoredProfile` need to inherit the `Profile` version they are extending, if they are extending a `Profile`.

Otherwise, a `TailoredProfile` built from scratch should not have a version associated to it. Additionally, we won't allow users to set the version of a `TailoredProfile` (at least initially).

> 4. Should the version string be incremented to include updates across operator releases (e.g., `1.4.0` compared to `1.4.0-1`)?

Reviewer: For cases when there is no change in the profile, but the operator got updated? Yeah, probably makes sense to do it that way.

Author: This could be something we can always implement later, too.

For example, we know we have the ComplianceAsCode tooling to expose version strings (e.g., `1.4.0`). The tough part is how we decide to handle build data in between benchmark versions. Introducing an automated way to have consistent build data as part of the version string would also require more tooling in CaC.

Because we don't have that tooling available to us right now, and it will take time to develop, I'm inclined to implement simple version strings that match the benchmark (e.g., `1.4.0`). This would at the very least get something to users with the next release.

We can always extend the version format, while still staying within the semver 2.0 specification.

What do you think?

life cycle. This expectation matches reality where profiles are version in some
way from an authoring body (e.g., PCI-DSS 3.2.1 to 4.0.0, or CIS OpenShift
1.3.0 to 1.4.0).

### Version Skew Strategy

Not applicable to this particular enhancement given the Compliance Operator is
a single installation within a single cluster.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Operational impact on this change should be minimal considering the profiles
need to be parsed regardless, and this change is limited to setting one
additional property on a CRD.

The compliance content shipped with the Compliance Operator by default may
change, which will still be true with this enhancement. Users should expect to
use `Profile` CRDs in the same way they have in the past.

#### Failure Modes

A potential failure mode would be if `version` were a required property of the
`Profile` CRD and the data stream contained a profile that didn't have a
version. In that case, profile parsing would fail, and not allow the user to
use the operator at all. This particular failure could be prevented in CI by
ensuring each profile contains a version, if it is a required property.

#### Support Procedures

> In the case above, users supplying their own content must ensure they're

Reviewer: As in tailored profile or?

Author: Even more elaborate than a TailoredProfile, where someone is crafting and building the datastream using the CaC tools and then loading that into the compliance operator.

This isn't a common case today. I have yet to hear of a user doing this in the wild, but I wanted to highlight it regardless.

setting the profile version in the data stream. Otherwise, they will not be
able to use custom content with the compliance operator.

Verbose logging will be added to the profile parser to detail the `Profile`
CRDs being created, and the versions parsed from the data stream so these
failure scenarios are traceable, and easy to detect.

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`.

1. Update each profile version for OpenShift profiles in [ComplianceAsCode/content](https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content)
2. Implement a new property called `version` for the `Profile` CRD
3. Add a CI end-to-end test that fails if a profile does not contain a `version`
4. Document profile life cycles across content and the operator, including versioning

## Drawbacks

> A potential drawback is how to best maintain versions across profiles, or if

Author: I think that depends on how we decide to implement versioning, and it could also depend on the benchmark.

Users are typically pushing us to update CIS benchmarks before we get around to it, so they're usually ok with the automatic update.

PCI-DSS is a different story though, where users need plan of action and milestones for getting from 3.2.1 compliance to 4.0.0 compliance. In these cases, I'm inclined to offer a PCI-DSS profile for each version, which would mean if they scan for PCI-DSS 3.2.1, it will continue to work even after we ship PCI-DSS 4.0.0.

The customer can run both profiles as separate scans, and ideally converge the results as they move towards a PCI-DSS 4.0.0 compliant environment.

Does that sound reasonable?

covered in a future enhancement if we decide to implement granular profile
versions, as noted in the non-goals section above.

Note that we can't enforce semantic versioning because the version is
ultimately set by the authoring body of the standard.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

There are two considerations for how versions interact with profiles.

The first is if there is only one profile, and it has a single version. For
example, supporting the CIS OpenShift 1.4.0 benchmark. The second is if there
is a single profile, but multiple versions. For example, PCI-DSS version 3.2.1
and version 4.0.0.

#### Single Profile & Single Version

This case can be implemented in the following steps:

1. Associate a version to the profile in
   [ComplianceAsCode/content](https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content)
   using the `metadata.version` attribute of the profile
2. Update the operator's profile parser to parse the version from the data
   stream, and set the appropriate attribute on the `Profile` custom resource

This will look similar to the following after the profiles are parsed by the
operator on start-up:

```console

> $ oc get profiles.compliance

Reviewer 3: if no special setting, `AGE` field is not available for this command.
```
$ oc get profile.compliance
NAME                             VERSION
ocp4-cis                         1.4.0
ocp4-cis-node                    1.4.0
ocp4-e8                          
ocp4-high                        Revision 4
ocp4-high-node                   Revision 4
ocp4-moderate                    Revision 4
ocp4-moderate-node               Revision 4
ocp4-nerc-cip                    
ocp4-nerc-cip-node               
ocp4-pci-dss                     3.2.1
ocp4-pci-dss-node                3.2.1
ocp4-stig                        V1R1
ocp4-stig-node                   V1R1
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-enhanced       
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-high           
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-intermediary   
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-minimal        
rhcos4-e8                        
rhcos4-high                      Revision 4
rhcos4-moderate                  Revision 4
rhcos4-nerc-cip                  
rhcos4-stig                      V1R1

```

Author: Ack - working on adding this into the output for Profiles so it's consistent with what's done today.

Author: Something like this is what you'd like to see, right?

```
 $ oc get profiles.compliance
NAME                             AGE   VERSION
ocp4-cis                         21s   1.4.0
ocp4-cis-node                    22s   1.4.0
ocp4-e8                          21s
ocp4-high                        21s   Revision 4
ocp4-high-node                   21s   Revision 4
ocp4-moderate                    21s   Revision 4
ocp4-moderate-node               21s   Revision 4
ocp4-nerc-cip                    21s
ocp4-nerc-cip-node               21s
ocp4-pci-dss                     21s   3.2.1
ocp4-pci-dss-node                21s   3.2.1
ocp4-stig                        21s   V1R1
ocp4-stig-node                   21s   V1R1
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-enhanced       12s
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-high           11s
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-intermediary   11s
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-minimal        11s
rhcos4-e8                        11s
rhcos4-high                      11s   Revision 4
rhcos4-moderate                  11s   Revision 4
rhcos4-nerc-cip                  11s
rhcos4-stig                      11s   V1R1
```

Reviewer 3: Yes, age field is available for the latest version of https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/compliance-operator/pull/425. A minor issue about some profiles have a empty value for the version field, such as nerc-cip profile, is it expected? Thanks.
$ oc get profile.compliance
NAME AGE VERSION
ocp4-cis 2m20s 1.4.0
ocp4-cis-node 2m20s 1.4.0
ocp4-e8 2m20s
ocp4-high 2m20s Revision 4
ocp4-high-node 2m20s Revision 4
ocp4-moderate 2m20s Revision 4
ocp4-moderate-node 2m20s Revision 4
ocp4-nerc-cip 2m20s
ocp4-nerc-cip-node 2m20s
ocp4-pci-dss 2m20s 3.2.1
ocp4-pci-dss-node 2m20s 3.2.1
ocp4-stig 2m20s V1R1
ocp4-stig-node 2m20s V1R1
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-enhanced 2m17s
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-high 2m16s
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-intermediary 2m16s
rhcos4-anssi-bp28-minimal 2m16s
rhcos4-e8 2m16s
rhcos4-high 2m16s Revision 4
rhcos4-moderate 2m16s Revision 4
rhcos4-nerc-cip 2m16s

NAME       AGE     VERSION
pci-dss    2d      3.2.1
ocp4-cis   2d      1.4.0
```

Profiles in the
[ComplianceAsCode/content](https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content) that do
not have a `metadata.version`, will not have that attribute set in the
`Profile` custom resource (using `ocp4-nerc-cip` purely as an example below):

> ```console

Reviewer 3: Same comment as above.

$ oc get profiles.compliance
NAME           AGE   VERSION
pci-dss        2d    3.2.1
ocp4-cis       2d    1.4.0
ocp4-nerc-cip  2d
```

#### Single Profile & Multiple Versions

The operator must account for cases where a profile has multiple versions.

Due to limitations of the data stream, each profile can only have one version.
Additionally, there can only be one profile using a given name in the data
stream.

The operator can expose multiple versions for a single profile using the following approach:

1. Version each profile to the initially supported version, keeping the profile name the same
2. When a new version is released, implement it using the versionless profile named
3. Implement a new profile for the older version under a new name

For example, this would look like the following in practice:

1. Version the current CIS OpenShift benchmark at version 1.4.0

> 2. When version 1.5.0 is implemented, move version 1.4.0 to a new profile named `ocp4-cis-1.4.0`)

Reviewer 3: This is a good point, although I am not sure how to test this point now.

Author: I added some details below on how we can test this in upgrade scenarios.

> 3. Release the operator with `ocp4-cis` as version 1.5.0, so that the versionless name always references the latest version

Reviewer 4: I would also consider listing the new version as a versioned profile name as well: `ocp4-cis-1.5.0`.

This way customers can create bindings and tailorings that will not roll-update to the latest version.
They don't need to watch out for updates to CIS profile to be able to pin version 1.5.0. If they want to they can already create bindings and tailoring that won't roll forward.

```console

> $ oc get profiles.compliance

Reviewer 3: Same a above.

History`.

1. Update each profile version for OpenShift profiles in [ComplianceAsCode/content](https://github.com/ComplianceAsCode/content)
2. Implement a new property called `version` for the `Profile` CRD
3. Add a CI end-to-end test that fails if a profile does not contain a `version`
4. Document profile life cycles across content and the operator, including versioning

## Drawbacks

A potential drawback is how to best maintain versions across profiles, or if
single profiles should have multiple versions. These questions will come with
additional maintenance load for existing compliance content.

To counter this, the `version` property should at the very least match the
benchmark, as noted in the goals section above. In more complicated scenarios,
the version could be expanded to handle changes between content, making it
easier for users to see changes between Compliance Operator updates. In this
case, version evaluation should be backwards compatible (e.g., `1.4.0` is older
than `1.4.0-1`), which can be addressed in a subsequent enhancement.

## Alternatives

An alternative to this versioning proposal is to have the `Profile` CRD support

> multiple versions of the same profile, with a list of versions. This would require more complex changes to the `Profile` CRD to support merging to profiles from the same datastream into a single `Profile` object, with multiple versions.

Reviewer 4: Nit: this line is very long.

```suggestion
multiple versions of the same profile, with a list of versions. This would require more complex changes to the `Profile` CRD to support merging of profiles from the same data stream into a single `Profile` object, with multiple versions.
```

NAME                             AGE   VERSION
ocp4-cis                         21s   1.4.0
ocp4-cis-node                    22s   1.4.0
ocp4-e8                          21s
ocp4-pci-dss                     21s   3.2.1
ocp4-pci-dss-node                21s   3.2.1
rhcos4-e8                        11s
```

#### Single Profile & Multiple Versions

The operator must account for cases where a profile has multiple versions.

Due to limitations of the data stream, each profile can only have one version.
Additionally, there can only be one profile using a given name in the data
stream.

The operator can expose multiple versions for a single profile using the following approach:

1. Version each profile to the initially supported version, keeping the profile name the same
2. When a new version is released, implement it using the versionless profile named
3. Implement a new profile for the older version under a new name

For example, this would look like the following in practice:

1. Version the current CIS OpenShift benchmark at version 1.4.0
2. When version 1.5.0 is implemented, move version 1.4.0 to a new profile named `ocp4-cis-1.4.0`)
3. Create a new profile named `ocp4-cis-1.5.0`

> 4. Release the operator with `ocp4-cis` as version 1.5.0, so that the versionless name always references the latest version

Reviewer 3: So if a user has a scheduled scan with ocp4-cis(-1.4.0), should the content image being used be updated to newer versions ocp4-cis(-1.5.0) automatically when ocp4-cis(-1.5.0) is released? Thanks.

Author: > So if a user has a scheduled scan with ocp4-cis(-1.4.0), should the content image being used be updated to newer versions ocp4-cis(-1.5.0) automatically when ocp4-cis(-1.5.0) is released? Thanks.

Yep - this will match the default behavior that exists today.

Author: Additionally - if a users wishes to pin to a specific version they can use `ocp4-cis-1.4.0` as the profile name in the binding.

    apiGroup: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
  - name: ocp4-cis-node
    kind: Profile
    apiGroup: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
settingsRef:
  name: default
  kind: ScanSetting
  apiGroup: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
```

This will result in the scan using the latest version of a benchmark. This is
the default behavior that the Compliance Operator exposes today, where updates
to profiles are always rolled forward. This behavior must be explicitly
documented, even though it was the default prior to supporting multiple
versions.

However, users have the ability to reference a specific scan name to scan using
an older version of the profile.

```yaml
---
apiVersion: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ScanSettingBinding
metadata:
  name: cis
  namespace: openshift-compliance
profiles:
  - name: ocp4-cis-1.4.0
    kind: Profile
    apiGroup: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
  - name: ocp4-cis-node-1.4.0
    kind: Profile
    apiGroup: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
settingsRef:
  name: default
  kind: ScanSetting
  apiGroup: compliance.openshift.io/v1alpha1
```

The above binding would only run scans using the `ocp4-cis-1.4.0` profile.

#### Immutability

> By default, the `version` attribute, label, or annotation of a `Profile` should

Reviewer 2: it should be noted that we don't do anything to prevent users from changing it.

be owned by the operator, which is responsible for parsing the data stream. At
this point, we're not going to support users setting, or overriding, the
profile version.

### Risks and Mitigations

Contributors updating profile content will need to be mindful of the profile
version they're implementing. Failure to update the version of a profile will
result in new content being delivered in an version. While this isn't riskier
than anything we do today, it will be misleading for users.

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

1. What happens when a `Profile` extended by a `TailoredProfile` changes?

Users can now extend an older version of a profile, but this profile won't
receive updates or new features. Users extending a versionless profile name
will always be extending the latest version, which is how `TailoredProfiles`

> work today.

Reviewer 2: another thing is I think we need to find out what to do is when the user chooses to extend on an older version of the profile, and on the next update, we do not support such version anymore.
